Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson.
Joan Slonzooski is a young biochemist who practices as a scientist and writes science
fiction.
She brings into her writing another element from her life.
She is a practicing Quaker.
Slonzooski's first novel bears the title Still Forms on Foxfield.
We asked her to explain the origin of the title.
From the title and packaging of this novel, the prospective reader might assume it is
strictly a soft science book.
On the contrary, the novel has a good deal of hard science woven in with good characterization.
Slonzooski's aliens, the commensals, are well drawn.
They are sentient mobile plants that communicate by emitting and detecting volatile chemicals.
We discovered that Slonzooski came up with these aliens while in the laboratory.
Listen to her describe her thoughts.
In my scientific work, I've studied chemical communication among bacteria.
And it was sort of of interesting to me, supposing you could have an alien intelligence that
would communicate chemically through things like pheromones almost.
How would this work?
Would it be possible?
And I tried to think what kind of creatures these might be and how they might work in
different ways than our usual vertebrates, mammals, humans, and so on.
And so it occurred to me they might have developed from plants, for instance.
They might use something akin to plant hormones.
Before Slonzooski could write still forms on Foxfield, she had to find a way to incorporate
these aliens with the Quakers who were to be the human characters.
And I also was getting much interested into Quakerism.
I guess that is slightly later date.
And the two things finally meshed together.
And that was really the key to the book was when I was able to combine those two ideas.
The idea of the aliens and the Quakers and how they would interact.
And at that point, that's when it became possible to move ahead with the book.
It seems unbelievable at first that science and Quakerism can mix so easily.
Here Slonzooski explains a bit about Quakerism and how for her the combination works.
Religion is basically Christian.
It developed during the Protestant Reformation with one of the Protestant branches.
But at the same time, it has become very universal as it has developed.
And Quakers today see a great affinity with other somewhat universalist religions such as Buddhism,
for example.
And I made that parallel in my book also.
And it is also a religion which scientists often find congenial because of the emphasis
on the experience of the individual.
In science, you test the universe by making experiments.
Quakers test the spiritual universe by medication and an inward seeking of truth.
An almost inward type of experiment.
Join us next time when we continue our talk with author,
John Slonzooski.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Bill Vernon.
We are continuing our series on science fiction author,
John Slonzooski.
Slonzooski carries the credentials of being a practicing scientist and a devout Quaker.
She is uniquely qualified to comment on the treatments of science and religion in science fiction.
Her view on the presentation of religion in science fiction.
I'm disappointed that it hasn't been treated more.
I think that it has been, where it has been treated, it's often been treated very well.
The hind lines, stranger in a strange land is a very controversial treatment of it, but
in a way it made people think about the issues and that was good.
What disappoints me more is that
often writers seem to create universes in which religion does not exist at all.
You see, I think you don't necessarily have to write a book about religion,
but it seems almost dishonest to write about a world where it doesn't exist because it's such a
prevalent part of life. And often it's prevalent in ways that you simply don't realize.
For example, I'm a scientist, my father is a scientist, and yet when I was little I learned
about Adam and Eve before I learned about evolution simply because it's such a basic
part of the culture. And a lot of us often don't realize how basic it is and how we revert to it
in times of crisis, such as a death in the family, things like that. And in science fiction,
very often people are portrayed in far future with the idea that simply religion has died out
and there is no more need for it anymore. Whereas I find that to be an unrealistic portrayal. It
seems to me that there always will be people who will need religion that itself. It's a basic part
of the human experience and that science is never going to completely replace that for people.
So, Anzuski has read a great deal of science fiction. We asked her what she watches out for when
she reads a book featuring scientists at work. What I have my eye on really is the interaction
between science and people. And that's the one thing that I think is the sign of an outstanding
writer is the one who can really show how science operates in real life, not how we would like it
to operate in a fantasy life. I think the Heinlein is of course the ideal example of that.
In most of the good Heinlein stories, he will take a look at technology and
get show the human perspectives on it and show how ordinary people's lives are affected.
Since Anzuski is a young writer just beginning her career, we asked her what her advice is to
aspiring writers. The most important thing in writing is to be distinctive. And by that I don't
mean outrageous necessarily, but to find whatever you have that is unique in your experience
and at every step of your writing to try to write something that hasn't been written before.
The second thing I would say is you just have to keep submitting what you write because now I was
very fortunate that the first publisher I sent my novel to happen to have an editor who really liked
the idea and was taking with it. That's an unusual thing. Agatha Christie took 11 tries to get her
first book published, you know, and there are all sorts of stories like that. So I would say those
are the two main things. Try to be, to say the ordinary in a distinctive way, to write originally
and whatever you write just keep submitting it to a publication.
John Slonsuski, a young scientist with great promise as a science fiction writer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.